mainly doing patching process and prechecks.
then checking on incidents and requests.
creating changes like scream test,file system extension/creation,CPU,memory resize and patching change.
changes are created like normal , standard, emergency , incident fix change.
raising vendor case like redhat and hpcase,veritas to find root cause of the server issue.
collecting  logs for server issue like sosreport
working on file system creation and extension
working on ASM disk addition and removal
working on user creation and deletion.
giving sudo access for the user.(id all=nopasswd all)
working on rpm and yum installation like java(JDK), uim,networker client,Oswatcher, splunk, crowdstrike.
The Java Development Kit (JDK) is a software development environment used for developing Java applications and applets
will provide CPU and memory utilisation stat. sar -r -f /var/log/sa/sa26 -s time -e time
working on cluster process like restart the packages, enable, disable, freeze and unfreeze.
doing networker restart, uc4agent restart, uim agent restart,
working on decommission process
changing permission for files and directory.

soft link is an actual link to the original file, whereas a hard link is a mirror copy of the original file.
If you delete the original file, the soft link has no value, because it points to a non-existent file. But in the case of hard link, it is entirely opposite

Incidents alerts

system reboot - check any activity going or not, not means need to check the /var/log/messages
file system space alert like /var, /home,/tmp - check the usage df  /fs then check which file using more - du -smx * |sort -nr |head.
swap alert - check top command which process using more memory then assign to the application team.
process stopped alert like nsr,nimbus,uc4 - check process status - service networker status (/etc/init.d)

Requests

user creation- useradd , set password
installation -  check packages available or not yum list pkg name, then yum install pkg, check rpm -qa |grep -i pkg

Yum can only install the packages available in its repository,
RPM can install multiple packages with the right file name and .rpm extension
yum -- -It resolves and installs dependencies automatically.
Automatic upgrades are done to the latest version.

rpm - Does not resolve dependencies.
Does not allow upgradation.

password reset
sudo access - /etc/sudoers then create at job - at time, to remove at job - atrm jobid

changes

scream test - to perform the scream test process is before decommission,the server is not in use, we don't know whose using the server. we have power off the server in 14 days, any application team came means we need to power on the server.

file system extension - we don't have space in vg means, need to add the disk,check lsscsi, fdisk -l - display hard disk, pvcreate, vgextend, lvextend -L +100M fs, resie2fs or xfs_growfs.

File system creation - add disk,pvcreate, Vgextend,lvcreate -L 20G -n , mkfs.ext4 -m 0, mkdir, mount and add /etc/fstab entry.

CPU,memory resize - stop the server, goto the console -> edit setting and give the size.

Booting process:

BIOS - Basic input and output - to check input and output connection

MBR - Master boot record - located in the 1st sector of the computer hard drive-
how to load the operating system, how the hard drve is partition.
contains information about GRUB

GRUB -Grand Unified Bootloader - you have multiple kernel images installed on your system, you can choose which one to be executed, it will allow the default kernel

etc/default/grub
grub2-set-default 1
grub2-mkconfig -o /boot/grub2/grub.cfg

Kernel - kernel is a core part of the os. it act as mediator between hardware and software, kernel once loaded into the RAM

Kernel is art of OS

Init - /etc/inittab file to decide the Linux run level. after os started

default run level -- 3

0 – halt
1 – Single user mode
2 – Multiuser, without NFS
3 – Full multiuser mode
4 – unused
5 – X11 - graphic mode
6 – reboot

Run level - When the Linux system is booting up, you might see various services getting started. For example, it might say “starting sendmail …. OK”. Those are the runlevel programs, executed from the run level directory as defined by your run level.

set run level -- /etc/init/rc-sysinit. conf
who -r  - check the runlevel


Patching process:

First we are taking the pre check output like - uptime, filesystem, kernel version, os version
then we are checking the updates like the command is yum updates
then checking on space available in /var and /boot. if not available means we are clear the space.
then we are giving yum update command to update the packages
once update done proceeding for reboot  shutdown -rf now or init 6.
after server up we are checking the uptime, file system and kernel.


inconsole - we are checking server status, restart the server,power off the server, taking cpu and memory utilisation graph, taking snapshot, we can take storage details, add disk, increase cpu and memory count


console - linux vm - rdp
linux physical - we are login to ILO
hpunix - vm - we are taking hpvminfo -v then login to the console host- go to CO -
physical - nslookup servername c -

default file permission - 644
directory - 755
umask root -022

fstab
device
mount point
file type
option - default
backup operation
file system check order
0 - take backup
1 -- not take backup
0 - file system not checking
1 - root FS checking
2 - other Fs



How to add static ip - /etc/sysconfig/network  - restart the network
root password reset--> single user mode -->rd.break -->mount –o rw,remount --> passwd root --> then reboot the server
Kernel Panic - restart and boot with old kernel
LV reduced- unmount the FS, lvreduce -L -5G path and resize2fs  
Firewall -- to prevent unwanted access -- running or not -- systemctl status firewalld
FTP - file transfer protocol - will use to upload the logs in the FTP




incident SLA

p1 - 15mins  - 3 hour
p2 - 30 mins - 8 hours
p3 - 4 hrs - 3 days
p4 - 24 hrs - 7 days

request - within 2 days need to assign
changes  -
standard - used for online activity like fs creation and extension and ASM disk addition
normal - minor -  2 days - scream test, cpu and memory resize.
significant - 5 business days - patching changes
emergency change - based on p2 incident,
